# Running a T86 program
There are currently two supported ways of running a T86 program. One is to use the CLI, other
to use the T86-VM as a library.

## T86-CLI
This is the preferred and supported method.

The CLI accepts a T86 executable in a text format and runs it.
The executable is made of sections. The T86-CLI cares about the `.text` and `.data` sections.
The executable also follows line comments beginning with `#`.

### Text section
Is mandatory, contains the instructions that will be run by the T86 VM.
The format and allowed operands of the instructions can be found
in the [isa documentation](t86-isa.md).
An example of an executable:
```
.text
0   MOV R0, 1
1   MOV R1, 2
2   ADD R0, R1
3   PUTNUM R0
4   HALT
```
Note that the addresses are completely optional and have no semantical meaning at all. They
can be included to make the program more readable.

The text format is more of a machine code in text format rather than assembly.
For example, jumps and calls are always to an address, not a label!
```
.text
0   JMP 2   # Address, not a label!
1   HALT
2   MOV R0, 1
3   PUTNUM R0
4   HALT
```

#### Operands
Here are some examples of operands and the shorthand that is used
for them in the ISA description or in parser error messages.
Do note that most instructions have a very limited set of
allowed operands. See the ISA description to get a list
of all possible operands for given instruction.

##### Immediate `i`
A number.
- `1`
- `-5`

##### Float immediate `f`
A float number.
- `3.5`
- `-33.1`

##### Normal Register `R`
A normal (non-float) register.
- `R0`
- `R5`
- `BP` - Base pointer
- `IP` - Instruction pointer
- `SP` - Stack pointer

##### Float register `F`
A float register.
- `F0`
- `F3`

##### Memory access
A memory dereference.
- `[0]`
- `[R0]`
- `[R1 + 1]`

### Data section
It contains data that will be stored in the RAM beginning from address 0 upwards
when the program starts. For example:
```
.data
5
3
```
The program will have the following values in memory: `[0] = 5, [1] = 3`

You can also store strings in the data section, ie.
```
.data
"ABC"
33
```
The values in memory will be: `[0] = 'A'`, `[1] = 'B'`, `[2] = 'C'`, `[3] = 0`, `[4] = 33`.
Note that the terminating zero is included in the string as well.

### Examples
See the `src/t86-cli/tests` for some more advanced T86 executables.
For even more advanced features and debug sections,
see the `src/dbg-cli/tests`. Documentation about debug sections
can be found in `docs/debugging.md`. They are, however, not needed
for just running the program.

### Running the program
You need to build the project (see `README.md`). After that, just run `t86-cli/t86-cli <executable>`.
Optionally set the number of registers and memory (see `t86-cli/t86-cli help`).
You can build the project in debug mode via `-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug`. Do note that you
will probably drown in debug logs if you use this.

## T86 as a library

This way is being kept from previous iterations of the course. But please do
note that it is not as supported as the CLI and it may be outdated.

__Note__: All code examples expect you to use namespace `tiny::t86`. It is not enforced on you, and it is omitted for better readability.

### Configuration
You can configure your VM by adding arguments to the executed program\
To set register count, use `-registerCnt=X` - default is 10 (you can use a large number of registers to begin with).\
To set float register count, use `-floatRegisterCnt=X` - default is 5.\
To set the number of ALUs, use `-aluCnt=X` - default is 1.\
To set the number of reservation station entries, use `-reservationStationEntriesCnt=X` - default is 2.\
To set RAM size, use `-ram=X` - default is 1024 64bit values (so total size will be 8*X bytes).\
To set RAM gate count, use `-ramGates=X` - default is 4.

__Note__: You can check config from like in this example:
```c++
Cpu::Config::instance().registerCnt();
```

### Creating program
```
ProgramBuilder pb;
pb.add(MOV{Reg(0), 42});
pb.add(MOV{Mem(Reg(0) + 27), 23});
pb.add(HALT{});

return pb.program();
```

__Note__: Do not forget to add `HALT`. Otherwise your program will run forever executing only `NOP`s.

### Running program example
```c++
StatsLogger::instance().reset();
Cpu cpu;

cpu.start(std::move(program));
while (!cpu.halted()) {
    cpu.tick();
}
StatsLogger::instance().processBasicStats(std::cerr);
```
__Note__: For more detailed stats, you can add:
```c++
StatsLogger::instance().processDetailedStats(std::cerr);
```

### Patching labels
```c++
ProgramBuilder pb;
Label jumpToBody = pb.add(JMP{Label::empty()});
...
Label body = pb.add(MOV{Reg(0), 0});
...
pb.patch(jumpToBody, body);
```

### Adding data
```c++
DataLabel str = pb.addData("Hello world\n");
pb.add(MOV{Reg(0), str});
```
Data will be stored starting on address 0 and further.
__Note__: This string storing is very wasteful. You can create your own packed data (I am sure you will be rewarded extra points).

### Accessing CPU registers
```c++
cpu.getRegister(Reg(0));
```

### Accessing CPU memory
```c++
cpu.getMemory(Mem(0))
```
__Note__: Memory is addresable by 8bytes (64bit values)

### Debug and handle function
Debug and handle functions have to have this function signature
```c++
void fn(Cpu&)
```
You can hook one handle function (executed on `BREAK`) by
```c++
cpu.connectBreakHandler(&fn);
```
or using c++11 lambdas. \
Debug example:
```c++
pb.add(DBG{&fn});
```
__Note__ that DBG will be added only if your `ProgramBuilder` was not given `true` argument indicating the release environment.
